So today, as you are trying to hold in your excitement for the game this afternoon, what we want to do this morning is we want to get started on a 12 week study of Paul's letter to the Ephesians.
And I titled this in him, which we're going to talk more about in just a few minutes, but it is a major theme of this letter that Paul had to write.
Now in terms of some background to it, most scholars think that Paul wrote this letter around AD 60 to 62.
during a period while he was in prison in Rome.
It is a letter that Paul wrote to people that he knew really well.
He had spent significant time in Ephesus.
In fact, you may recall several months back as we worked our way through the book of Acts, we spent a fair bit of time talking about some of Paul's experiences there in Ephesus.
Let me just by way of a bit of review take you back to Acts chapter 19.
This recounts part of it.
It happened that Paul passed through the inland country and came to Ephesus.
And he entered the synagogue and for three months spoke boldly, reasoning and persuading them about the kingdom of God.
But when some became stubborn and continued an unbelief, he withdrew from them and took the disciples with him, reasoning daily in the hall of Tyranus.
This continued for two years, so that all the residents of Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.
Paul spent a lot of time in Ephesus, helped get the church established there.
Now if you recall that story you'll know that his time there ended rather tumultuously.
Ephesus was a major religious center specifically for the worship of the goddess Artemis.
The great temple to Artemis was there.
There was a huge business for pilgrims coming into Ephesus, coming to that temple.
There was a big
souvenir business, if you will, except it was an idolatrous souvenir business, and there was a whole league of silversmiths in Ephesus that made their living selling these idols, these figurines of Artemis.
And to give you an idea of how much impact the Gospel was having as Paul is there in Ephesus teaching, preaching, discipling these new believers, more folks are coming to faith,
One of the things that happens as they turn to Jesus as the true source of power and mean to recognize that Artemis was a false God was there's a lot less demand for silver trinkets, which means that people are getting hit in the wallet.
And that got folks upset.
And the silversmiths actually started this riot that eventually drove Paul out of the city.
One of the things I'm looking forward to this coming fall when we take this tour to Turkey is we're gonna get to stand in that amphitheater where this happened.
I've been there once before and it is just kind of a wild feeling to be standing in this stadium and just imagine this place being full of people, basically all chanting for your death, that Paul experienced, but that's what caused him to leave.
However, in Paul leaving, he left behind
a growing church of believers, many small house churches that had continued to propagate after he left.
And so now Paul, years later, in prison, writing some letters, sends a letter back to these little house churches of Ephesus, both to encourage and to instruct them.
This letter to the Ephesians is a bit unique as Paul's letters go because it doesn't seem to address any particular problem.
It's a more generic, broad, pastoral letter, reminding them of their identity in Jesus.
And it also has a lot of practical advice how, in light of that identity, they should be conducting themselves with each other and within their community.
One of the little tidbits you learn from the closing of the letter is that it was carried there by a man named Tychegos.
They didn't have the US Postal Service.
What Paul had was he had Tychegos.
And if you look through the testament, you'll discover that Tychicus did a lot of letter carrying for Paul.
For instance, Second Timothy.
Tychicus is mentioned again.
And he apparently carried the letter that went to Timothy.
And Paul also mentions that he was sending him on to Ephesus with this letter to the Ephesians.
We also discover we get the Colossians.
Another letter that Paul says, Tychicus will tell you about my activities.
So Tychicus was the mailman for Paul.
It would appear.
Now, one of the key concepts that Paul returns to again and again in this letter is the idea that those who are true followers of Jesus Christ are not simply followers in terms of tagging along, but they've been brought into a profound new relationship that Paul describes with the language of being in Christ.
Let me give you a quick summary of just the various ways that Paul tries to get that message across.
Nine times he uses this phrase that I've used as a title for this series in him speaking of Jesus.
Thirteen times he uses the phrase in Christ or in Christ Jesus or in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Eight times in the Lord or in the Lord Jesus.
one time in Jesus, one time in the beloved, one time in himself, one time in the knowledge of him, one time in the name of our Lord Jesus.
If you add those all up, Paul refers to this idea of being in Jesus 35 times in this one short letter.
For Paul, the fact that believers are in him was this crowning truth.
It was the basis
their relationship, our relationship with God both in the present as well as the basis for hope in the future and it also became the guiding light for how they were to live with each other and we're going to be talking about some of that as we get into the book.
For the sake of time this morning I want us to look at just the first ten verses of the letter and
And I'm going to warn you in advance that by stopping at verse 10, we are literally cutting Paul off mid-sentence.
Now in your Bibles, if you read, starting at verse 3 down through verse 14, you'll find some periods in there, several sentences.
That's not what it looks like in the original Greek.
The original Greek from verse 3 down through verse 14 is all one sentence, 202 words in Greek.
longest sentence in the Bible.
And I ran across something, made me think of this a few weeks ago.
It was a little quip that came out of a Supreme Court hearing of all things.
What was at stake in this case?
A guy named Gabriel Olivier had been cited for some sidewalk preaching in front of a venue where there was a city ordinance that said he wasn't supposed to preach there.
He didn't argue the citation, he agreed, he was doing it, he paid the fine, and a story.
Except
He decided that really was an infringement of his First Amendment rights and so he filed suit against the city.
And part of what he wanted was he wanted that statute overturned.
He wanted to be promised and promised that he wouldn't be cited again if he went back and preached there again, which he fully intended on doing, okay?
Now, what made this thing end up going all the way to the Supreme Court
wasn't so much about the constitutionality of the law as whether or not Mr. Olivier, having been convicted of breaking the statute, could, after the fact, bring a lawsuit which in turn would mean that his prior conviction should be overturned.
You follow that?
So that's the case.
And there were some other legal precedents that got involved there.
And anyway, it all got very complicated.
And it ultimately ends up in front of the Supreme Court just this past December.
They're dealing with it.
And in light of all of the minutiae involved in this, and the complexity argument, a conversation happened between Justice Gorsuch and the attorney for the city, Mr. Butler.
Justice Gorsuch said to the attorney, trying to wade through this mountain of stuff, he said, what's your best shot in maybe two lines?
And the attorney said, how many commas do I get?
I would say that that's the kind of answer that Paul would have come up with.
How many commas do I get?
Because once he gets into his topic, he does not want to end this sentence until he's finished everything he has to say about it.
So, let's get started and let's read this opening greeting.
We're gonna start from verse one, go down to verse 10, again stopping mid-sentence.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to the saints who are in Ephesus and are faithful in Christ Jesus,
Grace to you in peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world that we should be holy and blameless before him.
In love he predestined us for adoption to himself as sons through Jesus Christ according to the purpose of his will to the praise of his glorious grace
with which he has blessed us in the beloved.
In him we have redemption through his blood.
The forgiveness of our trespasses according to the riches of his grace, which he lavished upon us in all wisdom and insight, making known to us the mystery of his will according to his purpose, which he set forth in Christ as a plan for the fullness of time to unite all things in him, things in heaven and things on earth.
You get all that?
Kind of a theological mouthful, isn't it?
What we start off by saying is that if we are in Christ, we are already possessors of heavenly blessing.
That in Christ language, we might take it as just a poetic way of saying that we are in God's family, but the image, I think, is more profound than that.
There's something that Paul's trying to capture in that language that is more than just saying, you're a Christian.
Maybe you've watched some spy movie.
And the spy is trying to break into some super secret, highly secure area.
And of course, you know how it goes.
They get to the door, and there's one of those retina scanners.
And you've got to look into this thing.
It's going to scan you and decide if you get in or not.
And of course, then the story revolves around
all of the high-tech stuff that the spy goes through to try to defeat that system and make it think that he is somebody that he's not.
We actually have that kind of technology probably right in our pocket.
I know I've got this iPhone and I don't have to punch in the key code to unlock it.
When I look at the phone and want to unlock it, it actually scans my face, recognizes my face and unlocks itself.
It knows who I am based on that scan.
What Paul I think is telling us is that when our lives have been surrendered to Jesus, we actually take on a new spiritual identity in God's eyes.
We are in Jesus.
In other words, when God looks us in the eye, when he scans us, what he sees is his loved son.
And because the riches of heaven belong to his son, those of us in Christ
are entitled to the same.
Now, I'm not aware of any scripture that indicates there are facial recognition scanners at the gates of heaven.
But if there were, what Paul is saying is that when you place your face in front of the heavenly scanner, it'll check you over, the screen will pop up and say, Jesus, the light will turn green and you get to go on in.
Because you are in Christ, you are in Him.
Maybe another way to describe this is to say that we are trust fund babies.
You know what a trust fund baby is, right?
Generally it is a large fortune that has been put into a trust, into a fund, that then this child is going to inherit, usually later in life.
There's a point at which it becomes theirs.
Now I discovered in looking this up that there are also what are called silent trust funds.
You can be a silent trust fund baby and what that means is that the beneficiary doesn't know the fund exists until some point that's been determined in the future.
Often it's when they turn age 25.
And I ran across an article about one of these silent trust funds and it was a mother asking for advice.
Here's what her question is, her little back story first.
She says, so far we've kept secret from them, their kids, that they stand to inherit multiple millions of dollars from my husband's parents when they pass.
My father-in-law switched jobs after my husband was out of the house, moved into a stratospheric tax bracket, and has set most of it aside for our kids.
They've made it clear to us that they'll pay fully for any college they get into,
And the trussers set up for the kids to come into this money in their late 20s.
And the parents' question was, when should we tell them?
Now, I just want to say that if Burnett and I are the beneficiaries of any silent trust funds, we are past our 20s, and it's OK to tell us.
Just let me know.
What Paul is saying here is that spiritually we all, because we are in Christ, to the Father's beloved Son,
We are all trust fund babies.
And it's not a silent trust fund.
Paul is saying, here's what you stand to inherit.
This has been set up for you.
And when the day comes that we step into his presence, there are blessings awaiting us that we cannot imagine.
Now some of us, probably all of us, have been through the experience of saying goodbye to people that we loved, that we know love Jesus.
They are
in Him.
And while we miss them, how beautiful is it to realize that they are living in the abundance and the beauty of those blessings.
Everything in the trust fund, they've got their hands on now in a tangible way.
Some of us know that there are more miles of earthly life behind us than there are before us.
And Paul remind us that when this life is over, we're not going to leave all the blessings behind.
We're going to fully step into blessings that are beyond our wildest imaginations.
In fact, he paraphrases some words from Isaiah later in his letter to the Corinthians talking about this when he says, no eye has seen, no ear heard, nor the heart of man imagined what God has prepared for those who love him.
I have a really good imagination.
I can imagine a lot.
And Paul says you haven't begun to scratch the surface of what God has in store.
I heard about an elderly couple who both died on the same day.
Years and years of marriage, they both passed away together, which meant they showed up at the pearly gates together.
And Peter was there to welcome him in.
For some reason, Peter always gets stuck in these jokes of showing people around.
So Peter's showing them around.
And of course, they're just blown away.
I mean, it's beautiful.
It's just so incredible.
And they're almost speechless.
And the wife finds turns and looks at her husband, and she can see there's a scowl on his face.
She's like, this is beautiful.
Why do you look upset?
She says, you know, if it hadn't been for you and that brand, we could have been here five years sooner.
Well because we are in Christ, there is boundless hope and blessing in our future.
The extravagant gifts of God's love.
But Paul doesn't see God's love as just something applied to our future, or even as just applied to our present.
He actually suggests that God's love predates us.
He chose us in him before the foundation of the world.
There is a love song by Savage Garden, where the guy says to his lady, I knew I loved you before I met you, which is a beautiful lyric, but we know it's more poetic than literal.
I had a pretty good idea, even at a young age, of the kind of girl that I thought I'd like to marry.
And when I met Burnett, it didn't take me too long to think that she fills the bill.
But the fact is, I didn't really
know her at that point.
And I certainly didn't know her before I met her.
In fact, after 42 years of marriage, I'm still in some ways getting to know her.
Which may be because I'm a little bit dense.
But Paul says that God, who is not dense, he is omniscient.
He knows everything about everything even before it is a thing.
Paul says the all-knowing God knew about me
And he knew about you before the world was even created.
And then at that point, he already had his plan in mind for me and for you.
He loved me.
He loved you.
He chose me.
He chose you before we were ever capable of knowing or choosing him.
Which blows our minds.
What are the implications?
What are the philosophical implications of that?
Does that mean that there's no such thing as human free will?
Are we simply pawns in some kind of a divine algorithm just running through the program?
Is our sense of choice, is that just an illusion?
If we knew the truth, would we discover that
We are simply clickety-clacking along some preordained set of railroad tracks to a preordained destination, and we really have no say in the matter.
That's an idea that's not just unique to the debates that happen between theologians.
In fact, there are people who have no faith in God whatsoever that basically suggest the same thing.
Robert Siplosky, who is an atheist.
And a biologist at Stanford has said, human choices are determined by genetics, environment, and experience.
The common idea of free will is erroneous.
So without any reference to God, he would say, you don't have any free will.
The choices you think you're making, if you could run the math, it's like watching billiard balls on the table.
You know the balls in that pocket because they got hit by this ball.
Just figure out the physics.
And there's no free choice.
Among believers, of course, this debate about God's sovereignty, man's free will has resulted in entire schools of theological thought.
And seminaries have been built, churches have been split, all trying to defend in emphasis one way or the other, God's sovereignty or man's freedom.
What's interesting is that Paul himself didn't seem to bother by the tension.
The first half of this letter he speaks
unapologetically about God's sovereignty.
Let me give you some examples.
We've already seen this in verse 5.
He predestined us for adoption.
Verse 11, in him we've obtained inheritance, having been predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his will.
Ephesians 2, where his workmanship created in Christ Jesus for good works which God prepared beforehand.
Ephesians 3,
This was according to the eternal purpose that he's realized in Christ Jesus our Lord.
So if you stop reading there, you're going to go way over on the side of, I'm just going to clickety-clack down the tracks of God's sovereignty.
I really have no choice in the matter.
God's predestined it all ahead of time.
But same guy, Paul, same letter.
You get to the second half and he says things like this.
Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and slander be put away from you."
What does that imply?
You've got a choice.
You might choose not to put it away from you.
Along with all mouths, be kind.
There's a positive command.
Here's something you should choose to do.
Tenderhearted for giving one another as God in Christ forgave you.
Ephesians 5, look carefully at how you walk.
Pay attention to where your feet are going.
Don't walk unwise, but as wise.
In other words, make good choices.
Make the best use of time because you could choose to make a bad use of time.
The days are evil.
Therefore, do not be foolish.
Again, don't make bad choices, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
Choose to walk in the way that He desires you to walk.
You have choice.
So how do we put these two things together?
How do you put together the fact that on one hand,
God is sovereign and seems to know the end from the beginning, and yet we as finite people are still told to make choices.
It's Paul just playing some kind of a weird game with us to let you think that you have a choice to make, but you really don't.
If you pulled the curtain back, you'd find out that, yeah, you really didn't have a choice.
Well, here's how I put these things together.
Funny, this week someone emailed me, they knew I was gonna be talking about this past year, predestination, and they put it in more spiritual language, but the bottom line was, good luck.
Here's why I put it together.
Quantum physics.
Let me explain.
I like quantum physics because it's this field where we can run experiments in a lab, and we can get verified, repeatable results, and end up with answers that seem
completely contradictory, absolute paradoxes, and yet we can see it, we can repeat the experiment, and we see it again.
Let me give one example.
Some of you, I had the fizziest guys talking to me after first service, so some of you already know about this.
It's what's called the double slit experiment.
Here's what happens with the double slit experiment.
When a laser emits beams of light particles called photons at a screen with two slits, you'd expect to see two strips to correspond with the two slits.
Instead, we see a pattern of light and dark bands.
This suggests that light behaves like waves that pass through both slits simultaneously, interfering with each other to create the pattern on the second screen.
However, when scientists used a measuring device to observe the slit that each photon passed through, the interference pattern disappeared and two strips appeared.
The act of observing which slit it went through changed the behavior of the photons.
No one knows why observing a particle causes its behavior to change.
No one knows why.
What is it?
Is light a particle?
Is it a wave?
And how is it that just looking at something could totally change how it behaves?
I've read a lot of these guys.
Richard Feynman wrote a famous book called Six Easy Pieces about quantum physics.
There's nothing easy about it.
And even Feynman basically says, well, here's what we know.
We have no idea.
We just tell you that there it is.
I think that when you think about this whole area, what do you think is more profound?
The behavior of a mindless photon of light or the interaction between the mind and eternal plans of the omniscient God and the mind and plans of mortal humans.
I would maintain if that's complex,
us to God is an even more complex relationship.
So I think we need a little humility.
Just like we need some humility in the realm of quantum physics, I think we have to hold some humility when we encounter this seeming paradox of God's plans and our actions.
I'll give you one image that has been helpful in expanding my own thinking about this.
It has to with how I perceive time versus how God perceives time.
In my perspective, time
is this linear thing.
I'm born, I live X number of years, I have experiences along the way, and then I hit the day where I die.
And I pass into God's presence.
That's how I conceive of time.
I do all my planning that way.
I've got a calendar that's laid out in linear fashion.
That is what time looks like to me.
God exists in a completely different sphere.
God lives outside
of time and space.
God doesn't have to think or act in a linear manner.
Time is something that is within his control.
And so, imagine the perspective God has when it comes to planning for the future.
God's sense of future is totally different than mine because future isn't future for him.
The way it is for me.
Does that explain everything?
Well, as soon as you explain quantum mechanics to me, I'll explain that to you, but it does give me a grid to go, okay, God, I get it that you see these things in a totally different plane than how I perceive them.
But here's the thing I want us to really think about this morning.
It's not the paradox of quantum physics or the tension between God's sovereignty and man's free will,
The reason Paul talks about this is he's trying to convey to them the pulsing, vibrant, jaw-dropping love that God has for you and me.
And Paul wants to understand that this was something that God was choosing to do.
He was already putting in motion before creation was even created.
And that's why Paul gets himself all tangled up with all the commas in this massive sentence, because he wants the people he loves to know how much they are loved.
not by him, but by the eternal, all-knowing God.
And in proclaiming that love, he wants him to see that even more magnificent than God's power is God's powerful love.
Let me take you to one section in this opening, verses 4 through 8.
He says, in love he predestined us for adoption.
You see, there is the driving motivation in God making his plan was love.
He predestined us for adoption to himself as sons through Jesus Christ according to the purpose of his will, to the praise of his glorious grace with which he has blessed us in the beloved.
In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace, which he lavished upon us in all wisdom and insight."
Now some of you, I know as we talk about this, you're immediately jumping to the thought of, well, what about the people that
God didn't plan ahead for.
Doesn't he love them?
First off, let me say that's not what Paul's trying to address here.
What Paul wants you to know is how much God has loved you and has been planning for you.
Now this is one place where I think there is some mystery to be sure.
I come back to the fact that God's primary driving motivation is love.
And so if there are people who are not included in God's pre-planning,
is not for lack of love.
It's certainly not because those who come to Jesus are somehow better or more worthy.
There has to be something in the mind of the eternal God, the one who knows all things that leads him to make the plans that he does.
And his plans are entirely consistent with his character as well as his knowledge.
And I'm convinced that when the day comes
And we stand before God and we ask for deeper understanding.
As he begins to unfold that to us, we're gonna say, well, that makes sense.
You did the right thing.
That doesn't contradict your character, Lord.
Now, ladies, you may be a little bit worried here that Paul talked specifically about adopting us as sons.
Is this a sign that Paul is a complete misogynist?
What Paul is doing is he's using this metaphor of adoption to explain this love relationship that God has chosen to draw us into.
And he's writing to a mixed audience.
We'll see that later in the book.
He's very aware that there are men and women reading this letter.
And he addresses both groups with great affection.
So he's not trying to cut the ladies out.
What he's doing is he knows how adoption worked in the Greco-Roman legal culture.
And like it or not, the law, when it came to adoption, gave everything by way of inheritance to adopted sons.
The girls got left kind of high and dry.
And so by Paul saying to men and women that in God's adoption, they are all sons, what he's saying is that God's richest blessings are equally available regardless of gender.
This is actually
elevating the women in that congregation to say, in God's eyes, you all deserve all that he has.
You all are in Christ equally.
Now, I usually like the way the scholars behind the English Standard Version, the ESV, handle their translation.
But I really don't understand one of the decisions they made in translating this passage.
Right there they've got, this was done according to the purpose of his will.
It's a valid translation.
There's nothing wrong.
It is talking about God's purpose.
But there are some other words they could have used that would say just purpose.
In this particular case, the Greek word that's used is a combination of two other words.
One of those words has the idea of your thinking, your intention.
But the other word has the idea of something that is good.
So in other words, this is your good thinking, your
good intention.
It indicates having a purpose, but it's more than just a plan.
It's a plan which the planner is pleased to plan.
Got it?
Every other translation tries to capture this bigger sense.
The New American Standard says this was according to his kind intention.
The NIV says it was according to his pleasure.
The New Living Translation says it was his great pleasure.
Why am I getting stuck on this?
Because I want us to see that God's plan to adopt us was a plan that he loved.
He didn't make it because he didn't have any other choice.
He wasn't just trying to make the best of a bad situation.
The plan he formed was a plan that pleased him.
And here comes the really mind-blowing part.
He made that plan with the full knowledge
of who we are.
What we have done and what we will do, it isn't so pretty.
Our trespasses.
One of our sons just completed an adoption a few months ago, and I can tell you that that little fellow is deeply loved.
In a sense, he was loved before the adoption ever happened.
before they even knew who he or she was going to be.
They had been planning and working for months and even years prior to that to be ready for this adoption.
They're two older children.
They had been talking to them, preparing them for a little brother.
It would suddenly be added when they adopted him.
But you know what?
As much as they wanted that little one,
And as much as they love him, as much as they are prepared to sacrifice for him, the truth is they really don't know him.
The day they took him home, they had no idea if he would be a gentle soul or if he will be the terror of the preschool.
They don't know if they have adopted an Einstein or if he's going to need some extra tutoring to get the ABCs.
They don't know if he's gonna be a super healthy buff kid or if he's gonna be sickly.
I need a lot of extra care.
But you see God, when he chose to adopt you, he knew all about you.
He knew exactly what he was getting himself into.
Part of his plan was the forgiveness
of our trespasses.
Talk about a different kind of adoption.
This is my favorite dog that I ever had.
I've had, I guess, three dogs, and this is Hershey.
Hershey's a chocolate lab.
I love chocolate labs.
She's a great dog.
I fell in love with Hershey the minute she showed up.
Now imagine you go to adopt a puppy, and as you're there looking at all different puppies, you notice that on their collar,
Each one of them has a rolled up ribbon tied to their collar.
And you ask the breeder, you say, what's the ribbon for?
He says, oh, well, you can unroll the ribbon, and it will tell you all about that dog as far as what they're going to do, what their future looks like.
You can read the ribbon before you adopt.
Let me tell you what would have been on Hershey's ribbon if I'd had a chance to look at it.
It would have said things like,
For two years, she will chew everything, including the petals and the seat off of one of your kids' bicycles.
She will completely destroy an entire garden hose with not a single piece longer than two inches.
She will eventually develop food allergies that will result in incessant licking and open sores and the need to keep her in the cone of shame for months at a time.
She will have a sensitive stomach that sometimes expresses itself in the middle of the night as she is sleeping next to your bed.
And you'll awake to the sound of a large dog preparing to throw up, causing you to leap from your bed, run through the house like a madman in the dark, trying to get to the front door with the dog making retching noises behind you, hoping she gets outside in time.
The list could go on.
But you get the idea.
If I had seen that list when I was making my choice, I might have handed the puppy back.
But God, the one who knows everything, still chose you.
And he knew there would be trespasses to forgive.
The list tied to my caller, and I'm gonna guess the list tied to your caller,
would be a long one.
And the price to be paid would be great.
That dog of mine, with her sensitive stomach and her food allergies, she cost me some money.
There were vet bills.
I had to feed her special dog food.
I mean the expensive stuff.
I have actually thought about trying to develop a taste for it myself, just to save on the budget.
There were bike pedals to replace, hoses to buy, carpets that had to be cleaned.
What was the price for God?
He's blessed us and the beloved.
In Him, we have redemption through His blood.
I had to get the carpets clean to fix what the dog had done.
God's Son, His beloved, went to the cross for me.
The late Timothy Keller commenting on this passage said, Jesus was pulled apart so that we could be put together.
And this was his plan.
It pleased him.
Now the cross didn't please him.
Scripture tells us Jesus despised the shame of the cross.
In his humanity he prayed a desperate prayer that he might be spared that trauma.
the day the crucifixion were told that darkness descended as if the father himself could not bear to see his beloved son suffer so.
But what pleased him was what the cross accomplished.
Our adoption.
Our rescue.
That pleased him.
Paul pulls this together by saying that
This plan was according to the riches of his grace, which he lavished upon us in all wisdom and insight.
If this plan of God doesn't leave you puzzled, you haven't really thought about it.
This is not the plan that any of us would have made.
Knowing the things that make me happy,
the kind of future that I would like for myself if I had known all that God knows about the future, about people, I would have made a different plan.
Don't take this personally, but it would not have included some of you.
It wouldn't have included me.
Why would you make that plan?
But God's wisdom is greater than ours.
His insight understands the deepest secrets of reality far beyond me.
For God, the double slit experiment is as simple to understand as one plus one.
In God's plan, His good pleasure was not driven by self-protection, which is how I make most of my plans.
How do I avoid pain?
God's plan wasn't driven by self-protection, but by love and grace.
And Paul says that gracious, self-sacrificing, forgiving, wise plan is something that God has been pleased to lavish on us.
The Greek word, this translated lavish, means to super abound, to be in excess, to be superfluous.
My father-in-law had a lot of little sayings, and one thing he'd often say after a large meal was he would say, we have had an excess superfluity.
That is what God has poured out on us.
He has poured out on us an excess superfluity of grace and love and forgiveness, and he was pleased to do so.
Over Christmas, I had the joy of holding my newly adopted little grandson.
I realized that he has no way of knowing at this stage how much he is loved.
He can't fathom how much effort went into bringing him into our family.
He has no idea of the resources of time and money and energy that we are prepared to invest into his life.
But I hope the day comes when he does know what it fully means that he's been adopted into our family.
as a follower of Jesus, someone who is in Him.
Do you know how much you have been loved?
Have you begun to fathom the effort, the plan, the sacrifice that God chose to bring you into His family?
The spiritual resources that are ours because we are His.
And if you're here this morning and you're not yet a follower of Jesus, you think it's interesting?
Church is maybe a nice way to get ready before the game this afternoon, whatever.
Could I just say that maybe today is the day that you would accept his invitation to be part of his family?
Maybe the reason life has brought you to this place at this moment is not mere coincidence.
Maybe you're here because God set a plan in motion long before you were even born.
A plan to draw you to himself.
A plan he made because he loves you.
And maybe you're thinking that wasn't a very good plan on his part.
Maybe you don't feel very worthy of being the object of that kind of love.
I just tell you that what makes you worth loving is not your self-esteem.
It's not your good behavior.
It's not your life accomplishments.
What makes any of us worth being loved is simply the fact that God has set his affection on us.
In Jesus, he paid the price for all of the stupid stuff that you and I have done or will do.
And if you're willing to trust your life into his hands,
He would love to jot your name down as one of the beneficiaries of everything that he has to give.
May God grant us the faith, the insight, the grace to grasp and to know a little bit more of just how much he loves us.
Amen?